README.md, before:

# Prompted LLM Steganography
This project hides and recovers secret messages within AI-generated text. For text messages (the only kind supported at the moment), it is highly efficient, able to encode a message in only three to ten times the amount of space while still appearing as normal AI-generated text. It takes advantage of LLMs' natural ability to predict a probability distribution both to compress the secret message so it can be encoded in less text and to hide information in the wording and formatting of a text document. A simple explanation of how it encodes information in text is that it uses the secret message as the source of randomness to select the next token, and recovers the message by reverse-engineering what that randomness must have been.

## Usage
Encoding a message
```bash
echo 'Hello, World!' | cargo r -r -- --model /path/to/model.gguf encode 'Write a paragraph explaning the origins of the term "Hello, World!".' | tee hello_world.txt
```

Decoding the message
```bash
cat hello_world.txt | cargo r -r -- --model /path/to/model.gguf decode | tee decoded.txt
```

See the help text for more information:
```bash
cargo r -r -- -h
```
```bash
cargo r -r -- encode -h
```
```bash
cargo r -r -- decode -h
```

IMPORTANT: Note that sampler settings and the model file must be exactly the same in order to decode successfully, or the small differences in the probability distributions produced will corrupt the message completely. Changing from CPU to GPU, from one GPU to another, or from one CPU to another may also exist, but I have not tested this. If hardware does make a difference, this is an issue upstream in [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) and there is nothing this application can do to fix it.

## Technical Explanation
The core concept used in this application is [range coding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Range_coding). Both when compressing and encoding text, the probability distribution over tokens produced by the language model is used as the probability distribution of the range coder. While the compression uses this distribution directly, the encoding takes extra steps to ensure that the output is conditioned by the prompt.

The encoder uses two contexts: one with access to the prompt, the "writer", and one without, the "steganographer". The writer greedily selects the first few tokens, 8 by default, to steer the generation in the right direction. From then on, the steganographer filters for only the most likely tokens, filtering out all tokens that are less than 2% the probability of the most likely token. It then selects one of the filtered tokens using range coding. Finally, the writer chooses the most likely token among the tokens that were filtered out and the token that the steganographer selected, adding it to the genereated text.

Decoding the message only requires one context. The first few tokens are ignored, as none of the message was encoded into them. Each other token is checked for whether it is within the filter. If it is, it's range among the filtered tokens is fed to the range coder. Otherwise, it is ignored and not used in range coding.

## Example message
Resources used:
- [Bartowski's](https://huggingface.co/bartowski) quantization of [Meta Llama 3.1 8B Instruct](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct), found [here](https://huggingface.co/bartowski/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-GGUF/blob/main/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-Q5_K_M.gguf).
- [decoder.rs](https://github.com/nkoppel/llama-cpp-steganography/blob/f6e23feaa1cb9f6d708884eeefc8bcbc36f716de/src/decoder.rs), a part of this project's source code.

Command to encode:
```bash
cat src/decoder.rs | cargo r -r -- --model Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-Q5_K_M.gguf encode 'Explain how UTF-8 works in detail.' | tee encoded_decoder.txt
```

Command to decode:
```bash
cat encoded_decoder.txt | cargo r -r -- --model Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-Q5_K_M.gguf decode | tee decoded_decoder.rs
```

The message:
```
UTF-8 (8-bit Unicode Transformation Format-8)
=============================================

UTF-8 is a character encoding that is commonly used on the Internet. It is an extension of the ASCII character encoding standard but capable of representing characters from any Unicode-supported language. UTF-8 was designed to be compatible with ASCII and to avoid the need for explicit encoding declarations.

### UTF-8 Basics

Here are the main characteristics of UTF-8:

*   **Variable-length encoding:** UTF-8 uses one to four bytes to represent a character.
*   **Backward compatibility:** UTF-8 preserves the ASCII encoding, which means that all ASCII characters are represented using the same code points (values).
*   **Multi-byte sequences:** UTF-8 uses multi-byte sequences to represent non-ASCII characters, which means that a sequence of bytes can represent a single Unicode character.
*   **BOM (Byte Order Mark):** UTF-8 files do not use a BOM (Byte Order Mark) by default, but you can use a BOM if you want to.

### UTF-8 Character Encoding

UTF-8 uses a binary structure known as an "UTF-8 sequence" to represent characters. These sequences are designed to be more efficient to process than the variable-length representations of other Unicode encoding forms.

An example of how characters can be represented in UTF-8 is as follows:

| Byte Sequence | Unicode Code Point | Character |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `0x00` | U+0000 | Null character |
| `0x01` | U+0001 | Start of heading |
| `0x02` | U+0002 | Start of text |
| `0x03` | U+0003 | End of text |
| `0x04` | U+0004 | End of selection |
| `0x05` | U+0005 | Cancel |
| `0x06` | U+0006 | Start of highlighted text |
| `0x07` | U+0007 | Start of graphics |
| `0x08` | U+0008 | End of graphics |
| ... | ... | ... |

### UTF-8 Structure

A UTF-8 sequence consists of one or more bytes that start with a byte value between 0x00 and 0x7F. Characters are encoded as follows:

*   **ASCII-compatible characters:** These are characters with Unicode code points less than U+0080 and are encoded using a single byte equal to the code point.
*   **Non-ASCII characters:** These are characters with Unicode code points greater than or equal to U+0080, but less than U+0800. These are encoded using two bytes with the first byte being `0xC2` followed by a byte with the code point shifted by 6 bits.
*   **Supplementary characters:** These are characters with Unicode code points greater than or equal to U+0800 but less than U+10000. These are encoded using three bytes with the first byte being `0xE0` followed by two bytes that have code points shifted by 6 bits.

Here is the structure of the UTF-8 sequence:

*   **Byte 1:** The first byte of a UTF-8 sequence is in the range of 0xC2 to 0xF4 and represents a code point with a range of `U+0080` to `U+10FFFF`.
*   **Byte 2 to N:** The following bytes of the sequence, if any, are in the range of `U+80` to `U+BF` and represent a code point with a range of `U+0800` to `U+10FFFF`.

### UTF-8 Conversion Examples

Here are some examples of how to encode and decode UTF-8 strings:

*   **Single ASCII character:** `hello` -> `\x68\x65\x6c\x6c\x6f`
*   **Single non-ASCII character:** `¡` -> `\xc2\xa1`
*   **Supplementary character:** `€` -> `\xe2\x82\xac`

### UTF-8 Parsing and Processing

You can parse and process UTF-8 strings by using a library that supports UTF-8 encoding. Here are some steps for UTF-8 parsing:

1.  **Read a byte:** Read the first byte of the sequence. This byte should be in the range `0x00` to `0x7F` for ASCII characters or in the range `0xC2` to `0xF4` for non-ASCII characters.
2.  **Determine the length of the sequence:** For ASCII characters, the length of the sequence is one. For non-ASCII characters, the length of the sequence can be two, three, or four bytes.
3.  **Shift the code point:** For non-ASCII characters, shift the code point by 6 bits for each byte after the first byte.
```

Commit message:

Make README.md more clear

README.md, after:

# Prompted LLM Steganography
This project hides and recovers secret messages within AI-generated text. It takes advantage of the LLMs' natural ability to predict probability distributions over text to both compress and encode secret messages in a way that appears like normal AI-generated text.

Key features:

* **Recover messages without the prompt:** You do not need to have access to the prompt you used to generate the text in order to recover the secret message.
* **Text compression:** The language model is used to compress the hidden message, allowing it to be hidden in less text. This compression means that you'll usually need 3-10 times the text to encode a text message.
* **Difficult to detect:** The generated text looks like normal AI text, and should be very difficult to detect, as the compression step gets the message very close to random noise. Default settings may allow undesirable tokens to be generated at times, but these settings can be tweaked at the cost of encoding efficiency.

## Usage
Encoding a message
```bash
echo 'Hello, World!' | cargo r -r -- --model /path/to/model.gguf encode 'Write a paragraph explaning the origins of the term "Hello, World!".' | tee hello_world.txt
```

Decoding the message
```bash
cat hello_world.txt | cargo r -r -- --model /path/to/model.gguf decode | tee decoded.txt
```

See the help text for more information:
```bash
cargo r -r -- -h
```
```bash
cargo r -r -- encode -h
```
```bash
cargo r -r -- decode -h
```

IMPORTANT: Note that sampler settings and the model file must be exactly the same in order to decode successfully, or the small differences in the probability distributions produced will corrupt the message completely. Changing from CPU to GPU, from one GPU to another, or from one CPU to another may also exist, but I have not tested this. If hardware does make a difference, this is an issue upstream in [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) and there is nothing this application can do to fix it.

## Technical Explanation
The core concept used in this application is [range coding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Range_coding). Range encoding takes a sequence of symbols and their probability distribution at each step and compresses them to a stream of bits, and range decoding takes those bits and recovers the symbols. In this application's case, the symbols are the language model's tokens, and the probabilities are taken from the language model's output. This is the exact process used to compress and decompress the hidden message, while the process to hide it in the generated text is more complicated.

Two generation contexts are used to produce the encoded text:
* The writer: Has access to the user's prompt, and tries to influence generation in accordance with the prompt
* The steganographer: Does not have access to the user's prompt, and encodes the message in a manner that the decoder can understand.

If we are generating the first few tokens, 8 by default, the writer chooses whichever token it thinks is most likely. This makes sure that some information about the prompt is available to the writer before we start using it. To generate a token after this point:
1. The steganographer filters for some number of the most likely tokens from its perspective. By default, tokens with probability greater than 2% the probability of the most likely token are allowed through.
2. The steganographer uses a range decoder that is decoding the compressed message to select a token from among the filtered tokens.
3. The writer observes the probability of the selected token and all tokens that were filtered out in step 1, and chooses whichever token it thinks is most likely.
4. If the writer and steganographer have selected the same token, the range decoder is updated to reflect the fact that some of the message has been encoded into the text.
5. The writer and staganographer both add the token the writer selected to their prompts.

Once the range decoder has finished decoding the compressed message, tokens can be generated in an arbitrary fashion. This implementation simply has the writer select the most likely token. Decoding works much the same way as encoding, from the perspective of the steganographer:
1. The decoding context filters the tokens in the same manner as the steganographer.
2. If the actual token is within the filter, it is encoded into a range encoder. Otherwise, it is ignored.
3. Once the decoder has read the entire generation, the range encoder contains the compressed message, which is decompressed and displayed to the user.

## Example message
Resources used:
- [Bartowski's](https://huggingface.co/bartowski) quantization of [Meta Llama 3.1 8B Instruct](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct), found [here](https://huggingface.co/bartowski/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-GGUF/blob/main/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-Q5_K_M.gguf).
- [decoder.rs](https://github.com/nkoppel/llama-cpp-steganography/blob/f6e23feaa1cb9f6d708884eeefc8bcbc36f716de/src/decoder.rs), a part of this project's source code.

Command to encode:
```bash
cat src/decoder.rs | cargo r -r -- --model Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-Q5_K_M.gguf encode 'Explain how UTF-8 works in detail.' | tee encoded_decoder.txt
```

Command to decode:
```bash
cat encoded_decoder.txt | cargo r -r -- --model Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-Q5_K_M.gguf decode | tee decoded_decoder.rs
```

The message:
```
UTF-8 (8-bit Unicode Transformation Format-8)
=============================================

UTF-8 is a character encoding that is commonly used on the Internet. It is an extension of the ASCII character encoding standard but capable of representing characters from any Unicode-supported language. UTF-8 was designed to be compatible with ASCII and to avoid the need for explicit encoding declarations.

### UTF-8 Basics

Here are the main characteristics of UTF-8:

*   **Variable-length encoding:** UTF-8 uses one to four bytes to represent a character.
*   **Backward compatibility:** UTF-8 preserves the ASCII encoding, which means that all ASCII characters are represented using the same code points (values).
*   **Multi-byte sequences:** UTF-8 uses multi-byte sequences to represent non-ASCII characters, which means that a sequence of bytes can represent a single Unicode character.
*   **BOM (Byte Order Mark):** UTF-8 files do not use a BOM (Byte Order Mark) by default, but you can use a BOM if you want to.

### UTF-8 Character Encoding

UTF-8 uses a binary structure known as an "UTF-8 sequence" to represent characters. These sequences are designed to be more efficient to process than the variable-length representations of other Unicode encoding forms.

An example of how characters can be represented in UTF-8 is as follows:

| Byte Sequence | Unicode Code Point | Character |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `0x00` | U+0000 | Null character |
| `0x01` | U+0001 | Start of heading |
| `0x02` | U+0002 | Start of text |
| `0x03` | U+0003 | End of text |
| `0x04` | U+0004 | End of selection |
| `0x05` | U+0005 | Cancel |
| `0x06` | U+0006 | Start of highlighted text |
| `0x07` | U+0007 | Start of graphics |
| `0x08` | U+0008 | End of graphics |
| ... | ... | ... |

### UTF-8 Structure

A UTF-8 sequence consists of one or more bytes that start with a byte value between 0x00 and 0x7F. Characters are encoded as follows:

*   **ASCII-compatible characters:** These are characters with Unicode code points less than U+0080 and are encoded using a single byte equal to the code point.
*   **Non-ASCII characters:** These are characters with Unicode code points greater than or equal to U+0080, but less than U+0800. These are encoded using two bytes with the first byte being `0xC2` followed by a byte with the code point shifted by 6 bits.
*   **Supplementary characters:** These are characters with Unicode code points greater than or equal to U+0800 but less than U+10000. These are encoded using three bytes with the first byte being `0xE0` followed by two bytes that have code points shifted by 6 bits.

Here is the structure of the UTF-8 sequence:

*   **Byte 1:** The first byte of a UTF-8 sequence is in the range of 0xC2 to 0xF4 and represents a code point with a range of `U+0080` to `U+10FFFF`.
*   **Byte 2 to N:** The following bytes of the sequence, if any, are in the range of `U+80` to `U+BF` and represent a code point with a range of `U+0800` to `U+10FFFF`.

### UTF-8 Conversion Examples

Here are some examples of how to encode and decode UTF-8 strings:

*   **Single ASCII character:** `hello` -> `\x68\x65\x6c\x6c\x6f`
*   **Single non-ASCII character:** `¡` -> `\xc2\xa1`
*   **Supplementary character:** `€` -> `\xe2\x82\xac`

### UTF-8 Parsing and Processing

You can parse and process UTF-8 strings by using a library that supports UTF-8 encoding. Here are some steps for UTF-8 parsing:

1.  **Read a byte:** Read the first byte of the sequence. This byte should be in the range `0x00` to `0x7F` for ASCII characters or in the range `0xC2` to `0xF4` for non-ASCII characters.
2.  **Determine the length of the sequence:** For ASCII characters, the length of the sequence is one. For non-ASCII characters, the length of the sequence can be two, three, or four bytes.
3.  **Shift the code point:** For non-ASCII characters, shift the code point by 6 bits for each byte after the first byte.
```
